Good morning.
My name is Michael Lopp.
I'm responsible for desktop
management technologies at Apple.
We're going to talk to you about
a lot of different stuff today,
focused around monitoring of systems
using Apple remote desktop as well as
a bunch of open source tools as well.
To kick it off,
an interesting thing happened
yesterday at the server feedback forum.
We had one gentleman over here saying,
I'm a command line guy.
Make sure I can do everything
from the command line.
Make sure the man pages are there.
And we're like, yes, absolutely.
We want to do that.
And then someone from K-12
stood up over here and said,
we want ARD to be really
simple to use and do all this.
So there's clearly a
need for both of those.
And I'm here to tell you,
you can have it both ways.
And that's what we're going to do during
this session right now is show you,
starting with ARD,
we're going to give you some good demos.
And then we're going to start.
We're going deeper and deeper
into the foundations of Mac OS X.
So to kick it off and
give us some context,
I'm going to bring Nader Nafisi up.
He's the product manager for
server and storage software.
Great.
Thank you, Michael.
Good afternoon, everybody.
So I'm going to give you a quick overview
about what monitoring is all about.
Hopefully you all know
why it's important,
but just kind of review it very quickly,
and then we'll let Michael and team
take it away with more demo and content.
So basically, monitoring, you know,
why is it good, why is it interesting,
it's really there to help you figure
out what state your systems are in.
You know, if they're up, if they're down,
maybe somebody's abusing it,
that kind of thing.
So you really need to have really
great tools and capabilities
to be able to detect that.
And the really cool news is
that Mac OS X has a lot of
capabilities built into it,
either the command line level or at
the GUI level to let you do that,
and Mac OS X server even gives you more.
And what's even better is that
there's a lot of open source tools,
just because we're a
Unix-based operating system,
a lot of the existing open source
tools have been ported over very
easily over to Mac OS X as well.
And so what we're gonna do
today is talk about how you can
extend App Remote Desktop to
better monitor your systems.
And this is more out
of the box type thing,
you know,
it's not exactly within the GUI,
some of these capabilities
are a little more hidden.
And we're also gonna talk about
how you can use Server Monitor to
extend that as well.
Again, as Michael said, there's a GUI,
which most of you guys have used,
there's also a command
line version of that,
which some of you may not have used,
and we're gonna talk about how
you can extend that using Python.
And last but not least,
we're gonna also give you an example,
again,
there's a lot of open source projects
out there you can use for monitoring,
but we've picked one of
the more popular ones,
and we're gonna talk
about that a little bit.
So monitoring, if we look at it,
there's four main categories of
ways you can monitor your systems.
And probably the top
of the list is assets,
monitoring your assets,
and essentially monitoring your hardware,
you know, things like has memory
been removed from systems.
I was at a presentation on Sunday where
Stephen Doyle from Edith Cowan was
talking about actually somebody
had added memory to their systems.
So you might see that as well.
So you might want to let
those kind of things go by.
But other things as
far as monitoring goes,
security.
Again, that's kind of a very
important thing these days.
So making sure that
nobody's abusing systems,
you know, as far as intrusion,
those kind of things.
Something that's very common when it
comes to servers is monitoring the
services that that server is providing.
So, you know,
monitoring the health of a web service,
making sure that it's chugging
along fine publishing web pages.
And last but not least is hardware.
We've got a rack of XSERVs here,
and again, monitoring them,
making sure they're all nice and
cool and happy is also important.
And so if we look at the desktop side,
there's a couple of technologies
and tools available there
for you to let you do that.
Close and dear to my heart
is App Promote Desktop too,
but there's also a lot of other GUI tools
out there as well as command line tools.
And if we look at server, again,
you can -- some of the -- a lot
of the tools in the desktop are
also relevant to the server,
but there's also some
server-specific tools out there.
like RAID Admin and
Server Monitor you can use as well.
And as I said, there's a whole bigger
universe out there as well,
and that's the open
source monitoring tools.
And here again,
we've got a couple of examples here,
and later on we're going to be
talking about Nagios and how
you can use that on Mac OS X and
Mac OS X Server to monitor your systems.
So with that, I'll hand the keynote
thing back to Michael.
Thank you, Nader.
OK, so back to ARD,
a product near to my heart as well.
So as Nader said,
I'm going to give you guys some demos
here about how to extend ARD a bit.
But I do want to talk about what
other things it does as well.
You hear me say this all the time.
It's a Swiss Army knife to me.
It has all these little doodads on it,
all these different things that you can
actually do not only for monitoring,
but for software distribution,
for blasting bits out
to all your machines,
for asset managing,
doing a lot of reporting against
all of your infrastructure,
remote assistant.
The reason that we have that
binoculars on there is being able
to obviously see your machines,
as we'll be seeing here in a second,
and then remote administration as well.
So ARD has it all.
But there's other things
that you want to do.
You have problems,
like my mobility-- I have
mobile computers and they're
wandering all over the place.
How do I manage these machines?
How do I monitor these machines
when they're not there,
and that's a problem.
You've got, I want this specific
piece of information,
it doesn't happen to be in one of the
many reports that ARD currently has.
I'm missing a task.
You've got all these different
tasks that you can do in ARD,
but you've got something
else that you want to do.
And then lastly, I want to see,
as Nader was talking about,
I want to see changes
in my lab over time.
The current reports are a snapshot
of what's on my machines right now.
So let's go take apart each one
of those and give you some demos,
as well as maybe inform you
about one feature that you may
not know about in ARD right now,
which is offline collecting.
So here we are, a very basic diagram of
ARD in the enterprise.
You have the admin and you have
your machines there on wireless.
How do I do a report against these
when these machines aren't here?
It's great when everything's live and
everyone's sitting on the machine,
but when it's gone, it's no longer there.
longer there.
What we have in ARD 2,
and this is offline collecting,
what it allows you to do is it
allows you to find a reporting
policy and send it down.
This is a task in ARD.
You actually send that
down to all your clients.
It says to these clients,
kind of like a cron job,
every night at 4 a.m.
send up the system
overview to my machine,
to my admin.
That's great if your admin's online.
Your admin's not already there.
So what we have is the offline collector.
It's basically a server
process that's up all the time.
This is the agent in our
Postgres database that's
sitting there all the time.
So when these machines aren't there,
or when the machines aren't there,
let's do that again.
When the machines aren't there,
obviously they don't report in.
When they get to the next
time that they're on the
network and they can report in,
they actually send that
information up to that database.
So the admin doesn't need
to be online to do that,
and the clients don't need to
be online to do that as well.
So what happens when you run this
report from your admin and you've got
this cache is the machine's not there.
You'll actually see the most
recent set of data for it.
So it's a really handy way to do a lot.
You're reporting against deployments
that have a lot of portables.
So let's keep moving.
So the other problem is I've got
all of this under information
that I want to get to,
and I can't actually do it.
Or maybe you've got a specific set
of information you want to get at.
Here's the good news about ARD.
We've got two things that we're built on.
First off, as I've already alluded to,
Postgres is built right into ARD.
It's a SQL database.
That's where we put all of
our reporting information.
As you'll see here in a second,
you can get in there.
You can get access.
You can get access to that
information to develop lots
of different tools against it.
And, of course, we're Unix.
We have millions of
command line utilities.
So let's actually go to demo three here.
I'm going to give you guys a couple
examples of doing some monitoring
here against some more machines here.
Demo three.
[Transcript missing]
Click on Send Unix.
And what I'm going to do is I want to
find all the PDFs on these machines.
Why do I want to do that?
Well,
I know there's PDFs on these machines.
But what I want to do is
I actually want to use Spotlight.
Now right now,
Spotlight's sitting up here on the right,
so the question is,
how am I going to actually use
Spotlight on these machines?
There's a command line utility,
which is called mdefind,
which goes and makes a call
straight into the Spotlight cache.
So what I'm doing here is mdefind.
I'm going to look for PDF,
and then I'm I'm going to go ahead
and send this command to my XSERVs.
It's running,
and here's all the information.
I just ran a remote
spotlight search using ARD2.
So, there's a million other
command line utilities there,
but what you can see here is that
it would be as a send unix command,
you can actually extend a lot of it.
So, you can see all the PDFs
that are associated,
and you also saw how fast it was
because the spotlight's really fast.
So, that's one thing.
Excuse me?
Oh, you want to zoom in?
I'm actually not set up to do that.
It's a long list of PDFs.
Sorry.
Excuse me?
Command, option, plus.
DAVID J.
Zoom.
No, it's not set up.
I told you.
OK, afterwards, come by.
I'll show it to you right in person.
So the other one I want to show
right now is actually-- Renata
was talking about security.
So we don't have a security report,
per se, in ARD.
But what we do is, again,
we have all these command
line utilities available.
So what I want to do is I want to
see who's logging into my machines.
So again, using the send Unix command,
we go ahead and do use last.
What last is, it says,
show me everybody who's
logging into my machines,
whether via SSH or via login window.
Again, huge amount of information
coming in that you're not going
to be able to see in the back.
I apologize.
But again, here you are.
I can see that people have been logging.
Apple's been logging in via the console.
They've been logging in via SSH.
Again, the point is simple.
Send Unix allows you to multicast
commands out to all your machines,
and there's a huge amount of
command line utilities out there.
So to keep on going,
let's go back to slides.
Slides.
I'm actually going to
bring up Tony Graham.
Tony's actually written a solution in
Real Basic to actually do the asset
tracking and system trend reporting.
Tony's one of our system engineers.
Come on up, Tony.
Can I get demo 2 up, please?
So Michael said the
Apple Remote Desktop tool collects
system information reports,
and it stores them in
a Postgres database,
but you only get that last
bit of information you
collected from each client.
How many of you in the room would like
to be able to track this stuff over time?
Many.
Okay.
So it's actually pretty easy.
I chose Real Basic.
As a developer tool because it's
got a very shallow learning curve.
It's well suited for system
administrators who don't
want to learn C or Java.
Very graphically oriented and has
built-in plugins to talk to databases.
So I can go to my file
menu in Real Basic,
add a data source.
I'm going to specify Postgres.
The database name would be ARD,
username would be ARD.
Any guesses as to the password?
ARD.
And I can now double click
on this database here and
see all the tables in it.
Any experienced database administrators,
people who use SQL and
that sort of thing?
Yeah?
Alright, great.
The system information table has just
about everything you're interested in.
It's all the stuff the report has pulled.
So you can hit a basic query there.
You can also do a more advanced one.
Here's one.
That's going to get the distinct list
of property names from the database.
These are the things you can track.
"How's that?
Things like Ethernet address,
your computer name, IP addresses,
all that good stuff is in there."
I should back up and say that the
database is not available to you until
you unlock or roll back some of the
security mechanisms that are in place.
There are two configuration files
that you can edit to do that,
or you can download a tool written
by Mike Bombic called Atom.
Click a button, put in a password,
and it will unlock that database for you.
So let's build something
very simple here.
I'm going to take a pop-up menu,
drag it onto my standard window,
stretch it a little bit wider,
and a database query control.
And the database query control
over here on the right,
I can say that is the ARD database.
And I can say select distinct
property name from system information.
This is standard SQL.
The Postgres book by O'Reilly is an
excellent source for some of this stuff.
And I can do a binding to that
pop-up menu and say I want that
pop-up menu to show everything that
my database query has returned.
Now we'll drag a list
box onto the window.
A two column list box,
I want that to grow with the window,
and I want in fact the
window to be able to grow.
And I need a new database query
control for that list box.
The pop-up menu that's going
to give me the unique list of
all items is going to feed the
selected item into the second query.
So the database,
the second database query will
take that and do something with it.
What it's going to do
is use the ARD database,
This one's going to get the computer ID,
which is the MAC address,
and that's kind of the unique flag that
you're tracking all of your fields with,
and the value from the system
information table where the property name
is equal to,
and then this is a real basic thing,
percent one will be passed to your
database query by that last pop-up menu.
Finally,
I want to bind the list box and say any
results that come from that database
query are going to go in there.
So let me just double check and
make sure all that stuff is there.
We run it.
Should have a unique list of all
of the things that ARD tracks.
Kernel version.
There we go.
So you've got tremendous
power under the hood,
but you can expose this now to end users.
This application will compile
and run on multiple platforms.
[Transcript missing]
An XML text file in RSS format,
and so you can generate your
own reports very easily.
This is just Safari RSS loading a
file that's on the local hard drive,
which you'd be able to sort by date,
by time.
The article length slider here will allow
you just to show the most recent value.
And again,
this is something you can use to
publish this data to other folks
in your organization that perhaps
aren't running Apple Remote Desktop or
maybe even not using Macs.
Thanks.
Good use of Zoom there, Tony.
Looked good.
All right, so real quick,
what did we learn?
So the point is that ARD is extensible.
You can actually sit down.
If we don't do that task for you
right now via the user interface,
there's probably a way that you're going
to figure out to actually go do it.
We're designing ARD and future versions
of ARD with portability in mind.
We know that there's a huge amount
of mobile computers out there.
We'll continue to support that.
And our open database infrastructure,
it's great.
It's SQL.
You can go and use it.
You can do the applications
Tony demonstrated.
You can pick whatever tool you want.
But let's keep going.
I'm going to bring Todd Daly up here.
We're actually going to go under
the hood a little bit deeper.
Todd?
Todd's one of our system engineers.
Okay, so we've looked through a couple of
things with Apple Remote Desktop now,
and now we're going to go a little bit
deeper into more details on how we can
operate things from the command line.
So I'm hoping to speak to two groups
of people here that I think are
going to be interested in this.
First of all, if you're interested in the
Apple Remote Desktop part of the
presentation and you're thinking about,
you know,
how could I do a little more here?
How could I learn a little
more about what I can do
with that send Unix command?
Then hopefully this will get
you started with scripting.
If you're already an
experienced scripter,
then hopefully we'll show you a
couple ideas here about how you
can use some of the tools that are
included with OS X Server that are
unique to OS X and OS X Server to
do what you're already doing.
So we're going to go through the
process of writing some scripts.
When to use a script is actually
a pretty simple decision process.
So the main thing that scripts do
is they automate repetitive tasks.
The script is going to run
the same way every time,
all the time.
No matter what you do,
it's going to run the same way.
Maybe something changes on the back
end but that's probably what we
want to monitor with the script.
The second thing a script does
is it outputs data consistently.
So if you're going to
build an Excel spreadsheet,
if you're going to feed
this into a SQL database,
you want a common comma
separated value format,
a common text format,
a common XML format that this can spit
out so that you can then import that
as Tony was showing into Safari RSS so
that you can do things like that.
And the third thing that a script does
that's probably most important to those
of you that are system administrators is
that a script runs when you aren't there.
So when the system dies
at 2:00 in the morning,
a script can run and send you a message.
So you can see the
information about that.
When a RAID, as we'll show you, degrades,
when part of a mirror degrades and
you've got half of the system broken,
a script can run and show you that
that system's broken rather than
having the CIO call you and go,
why is the system down?
You knew long ago that part of the
mirror was broken and maybe you
made that decision at 2:00 a.m.
to drive in and replace the drive.
Maybe you didn't but it's your choice.
You're empowered now by the information
that we're gathering and collecting.
So scripting is great in OS X Server.
You've got a really
wide range of choices,
and if you're familiar
with the Windows world,
or if you're familiar
with the Linux world,
we've really got a great set of
tools for you in OS X Server because
of everything that's built in.
You've got a guaranteed baseline
in OS X Server that includes things
like Python and things like Perl,
a whole wide variety of scripts,
and even some newer languages
like Ruby are all built in,
and what that means is that when you're
deploying something onto a Tiger server,
you can count on a minimum
version being there,
and it gives you a lot of power.
When you're deploying a Linux system,
when you're deploying a Windows system,
you don't have the same guarantee
of a consistent base system
being there because of all
the different Linux distros,
because on the Windows side,
you have to install
something like SIGWIN,
or you have to install
Perl from ActiveState,
you have to install
Windows Scripting Host.
You don't have the same
consistent environment.
So there's a lot of
choices that you have,
including Apple Script,
including Automator.
I think the best choice is
actually pretty obvious.
The best choice is
whatever you already know.
If you already know Perl,
if you already know Shell Scripting,
if you already know Python,
if you already know anything,
it's probably best to
stick with what you know.
If you're new to this and
you're just trying to learn,
get into writing your own scripts,
doing your own tools, I think Python is a
fantastic starter language.
O'Reilly over in their booth has
some great books to get you started.
The nice thing about Python that you'll
come to hate later about it is that
it enforces a consistent structure.
It's white space sensitive.
You have to indent things.
It's self-documenting,
easy to read later,
which can't be said of tools like Perl.
So Python is a great tool to start with
because it enforces good habits on you.
As you get better and you
want to use bad habits,
you'll come to hate it and
you'll learn something else.
Okay, so we're going to start out
with a very small shell script.
And so this is great because what
the very small shell script is
going to replace is someone being
there at 2 in the morning when
one half of the RAID fails and
you've got to change something.
So the problem is that software RAID 1
is commonly used on XSERVs and it is
enabled for it to be monitored on XSERVs.
So when half of a RAID fails,
you may be able to notice,
those of you on this side over here,
the actual broken RAID,
which you can tell is broken because we
actually physically popped the drive out.
You can see we've got an alert
light blinking over here.
And if we were running Server Monitor,
we'd actually see the
identifier light on there.
And we'd actually see that there
was an amber light and we'd
actually get notified that there
was a problem on the server.
What we want to enhance on that
is that within Server Monitor,
you can send out generic alerts.
So you can send out an alert that says,
"There's a problem on Server 4."
What we can't do within Server Monitor,
although it's a great tool and
there's great monitoring built in,
is that we can't send a
specific alert that says,
"There's a problem on Server 4 and
the problem is that one side of
the RAID mirror is broken." So,
we've got to do that.
So, what we're going to do is add a
little bit more detail so that
when you get that page in the
middle of the night to your phone,
you emailed your phone
through Server Monitor,
instead we're going to email it through
this shell script and it's going to say,
"Hey, one half of this mirror is down."
So that way you don't have to get up,
you don't have to VPN in,
you don't have to look at the
server to what's going on.
You can take a bleary look
at your cell phone and go,
"Well, half the RAID is down,
the system's still up and going.
I'm okay."
So, what we're going to do,
and I'll show you this
in the demo as well,
is we're going to wrap around
some command line output.
So there's a tool with an OS X server,
DiskUtil Check RAID,
that puts out some text here that
tells us what's going on on the RAID.
So, this is actually a ripe area
for writing a script to,
and the reason for that is that
the text output here is consistent.
So, when we look at this through
the eyes of the scripter,
what we're looking for is the places
in which we can grab some text and
look at it and see what's wrong.
So, as you can see on here,
we can see on the script that
there's two areas here where
it says the system is okay.
So, if we were going to write a script
to see if anything was wrong,
we'd probably want to look at those
two fields and see if they've changed.
And so, that's exactly what we're
going to do with our script.
So the script,
while this looks intimidating,
is actually very simple.
All we're going to do is we're
going to look at those OK fields,
so we're going to strip all of the text
out except for those fields that say OK.
We're going to take a look at them and
see if they say anything other than OK.
And if they say anything other than OK,
we're going to kick off an email to
the system administrator's cell phone,
and you're going to get it,
and you're going to see
that something is wrong.
Okay, so let's go through that in a
demo here on Demo Station 1.
Okay, so let me go ahead and
show you the script again.
[Transcript missing]
Okay, so let me build this up for you.
So here's Disk Util Check Raid.
And what we're going to do now
is we're going to send this
through a tool called grep.
What this grep line does is it grabs
any lines that begin with 0 or 1.
Assuming that we have a mirror,
online drives within the mirror are
going to start with the 0 or the 1,
drive 0 or drive 1.
And so what you see here is that unlike
the output that there was before,
we've now grabbed just the
line here that starts with one.
So that's the only output
that we're grabbing with this.
And then the final step I'm going
to show you for the demo here,
is that we pipe this through awk,
which grabs the third text
field and just outputs that.
So now we've done all the hard work
that we need to do to write this script.
We've taken the output of the
Disk Util Check Raid tool,
and we've taken that down to just the
line that says-- that we want to compare
to and see if that is okay or not.
And so when we go back
to the script here,
you can hopefully follow the logic here.
If that third text field
says anything other than OK,
then we're going to email
that information out.
So let's just run that real quick.
Somewhere here.
Could have typed it by now.
And you see the output here.
We're now just outputting that the
RAID has the status of missing damage.
And again, we get emailed in
production here on this.
And so that's it.
That's the very small shell
script that runs this.
Normally you'd run this as a
cron job every two hours or so,
and so if anything ever did go wrong,
you'd get emailed with a direct alert.
So that's a very small,
very simple example for demonstration
purposes of how you can go beyond
what Server Monitor reports
and start customizing your
environment to your needs.
So let's go back to the slides.
So let's look through a little
more sophisticated problem now.
And so the problem that we're going to go
to solve now is that Server Monitor gives
us a ton of information.
It's a really great tool.
It's great that it's
free with OS X Server.
It's great that you can go to any
X Serve and you can pull a ton of
data off of it from what kind of
RAM chips you have in there and what
slots they're in to what the voltage
levels are over time on the system to
the example that we're showing here,
which is what are the CPU temperatures.
The X Serve G4 has two,
and the X Serve G5 has 11 temperature
systems built within the system
that you can actually go in through
Server Monitor and you can see.
The issue here is that there's no
way to take that data and trend it
over time other than the graphing
that's within Server Monitor itself.
So if you have a large cluster,
if you have a whole bunch of systems,
if maybe you're having some overheating
problems in your department,
you might want to graph the
temperature of these systems over time.
And so what we're going to write is we're
going to write a small Python script that
will wrap around the Server Admin tool,
which is another command line tool
that you have within OS X Server.
And we're going to take that data,
we're going to parse it out,
we're going to display it on the screen,
and we're going to also write it to
a comma-separated text file so that
then you can load that into Excel,
you could load it into
a real basic script,
you can load it into Nagios that
we're going to show you next.
You can do a lot with that data
because we've now got a lot of data
that we can show you right now.
Rather than show it on the screen,
we're going to actually
write it out to a text file.
So how do we get data with server admin?
So server admin is a command line
tool that lets you see everything
that's going on with the system.
And I'll show you a demonstration of
this command line in just a second.
But it spits out about 500 lines of
text that's all the data that you
see in Server Monitor in text form.
One thing we added in Tiger,
which is great too,
is that we added a dash X switch,
which outputs in XML.
So as Tony was showing you,
there's a lot of stuff like
Safari RSS and a lot of scripting tools,
a lot of programming tools
that understand XML natively.
A little bit easier to work with
than just parsing the raw text
like what we're going to do today.
And so let's go ahead
and go into that script.
Thank you.
Okay.
So let me show you the script first,
and then we'll step through and
show you exactly what goes on here.
So what we've got here
is a Python script.
As you can see, Python is a very
well-structured language.
It's very easy to follow what's going on.
If you've done any programming at all,
basically we've got a somewhat
more sophisticated script than
what we were showing you before.
But the core of what it's doing
is actually pretty simple.
The core line that we're
concerned about here is this one,
in which we're running this
command and capturing the output.
And then we're processing
that in the script.
That's basically all
this script is doing.
So let's go ahead and
take a look at that.
So here, we're going to actually run
that command that I just showed
you that the script is running.
And what you can see here is this is just
a whole bunch of text about your system.
And this exactly corresponds to the
data that you see in Server Monitor.
Just Server Monitor has
it pretty with graphs,
with lights, with green lights,
with red lights.
But it's actually the exact same data.
You can sit and compare this with
the data in Server Monitor and
you'll see it's exactly the same.
So what you'll see
here is some data here.
Just for example,
we've got the fan RPM on the system.
We've got information about the RAID.
We've got information about the
actual drives and what kind they are.
Ton of information that's in here.
So what we're going to do
is extract some data out.
And before I do that,
let me show you too the XML output,
just so you know.
And so, same data done in XML.
Again, if you know XML,
if you have a tool that understands it,
you can go in through this as well.
Okay, so let's go back to the script.
So this is the data we're collecting.
And so we're going to basically
load all of this data into an array,
which is what we're doing here.
And for each value,
we're going to assign it.
So these are the 11 temperature
sensors that are on a XServe G5.
We're going to assign
all these to a variable.
We're going to display those
variables that we assigned.
And then the last section here,
we're going to log those values
to a comma-separated value
file var log xservtemp.log.
And so that's what we're
doing within the script.
Again, we're just grabbing data that's
provided by the command line tool,
and we're just going to write that
out into a comma-separated value
file and give you a way to view that.
And so we just ran the script,
and as you can see, there's the output.
So that's the actual temperature of
the system as it's running right now.
And we also at the same time
wrote a log entry for that.
Normally you'd set this up as a time job,
a cron job, run it every hour,
every 15 minutes, every 10 minutes,
whatever you wanted to do.
And then you could go back and check
that comma separated value file
at any time and find out exactly
what was going on in the system.
And again,
any of the data that's in there,
not just the temperature data,
but there's data about the memory,
there's data about the
status of the system,
you can go in and check that at any time
and be able to monitor basically anything
that server admins reports with this
general framework of this Python script.
So let's go back to the slides.
So what did we learn in this section?
What we learned is that scripts
are a really powerful extension.
You can do a Send UNIX script,
which does some of the
tricks that we do here.
But you can write your own scripts, too,
that can collect information off the
system and put them wherever you want.
You can put those into a MySQL database.
You can put those into
the ARD Postgres database.
The sky's the limit onto
what you want to do.
And so if you manage a bunch of servers,
or even if you only manage a few,
and you need to run reports,
you need to get data off of the system.
Using a script is a great way to
save you from having a 10 page
process that you have to run through
every quarter to get a quarterly
report together for your manager.
There's many tools available.
New to Airport is an Airport command
line tool that collects
data off the client side.
So you can see what, for example,
your students are connecting
to in terms of access points,
things like that.
Server Admin, we showed you.
System Profiler is a great
tool on the client as well.
It shows you all of the information
about the client and how it's configured,
what the hardware is,
what the software is, everything.
And you can write scripts that can make
your life easier by automating tasks.
So that's it on the scripting session.
Now we're going to get a little geekier.
In fact,
Nader wanted me to have a beard and
wig that I could put on right now
and show myself as a true Unix geek.
But what we're going to do now is
we're going to take that same concept,
and we're going to integrate
Mac OS X into an open source
network management system.
And we're going to do that using an open
source management system called Nagios,
which is really easy to set up compared
to any other network management system.
And so we're going to integrate into that
and show you how we can do the exact same
thing we just showed you with the small
shell script inside of Nagios itself.
So that same RAID monitoring
that we were doing,
we're going to do now within the
context of a network management system.
Okay,
so there's a lot of monitoring solutions
that you potentially have out there.
There's open source systems,
and there's commercial systems.
On the open source side,
a lot of people use very
simple tools like MRTG,
which is a simple graphing tool
that generates pretty pictures.
A lot of people use Nagios.
A lot of people use HP OpenView.
A lot of people use Tivoli, CA Unicenter.
Microsoft Mom is out there as well.
There's a lot of tools that are out there
that people use to monitor their system.
So you have a lot of choices,
and you have a lot of client
options on many platforms,
including OS X.
And you have open source standards-based
solution like SNMP that can
report back into something like
HP OpenView or something like Tivoli.
On the servers,
you have many choices as well on
platforms to run the server management,
including OS X,
like we're going to show you today
with Nagios running on OS X server.
But Nagios is what we're showing.
But you have a lot of options.
There's a lot of ways in
which you can do this.
We're going to show you one
way to do it that works for us.
So, what is Nagios?
So, Nagios is an open source
management framework.
It's free.
It's widely deployed within education,
within business,
within corporate enterprises,
within very large deployments.
It's got a fully
web-based infrastructure,
so you don't have a separate
sort of application that's the
network management console.
The network management
console is the web browser,
and you pull everything up through there.
It's got a great plugin architecture,
both for monitoring and for notification,
meaning that it's very easy to take
any device that you have and plug
it in to be monitored by Nagios.
And also, if you have something new
that you want to be notified,
if you want to notify your Palm handheld
or whatever new gadget is on the market,
your Sidekick, your LifeDrive,
your whatever,
there's a way to do that within
the notification plugin framework.
One very important aspect of Nagios
that you get for free is that you
can get a free version of the app.
One of the things that you get
for free that you pay a lot for
for something like Ativoli is that
it's got hierarchical monitoring.
And so,
what that means is that you can set
up the alarms in such a way that the
system knows that if the router is down,
that the servers behind it are also down,
and it doesn't need to tell you that.
And so, if you have a lot of servers,
this is very important,
because if you have 500 servers
that are behind a router,
and a router is down,
and you don't have some way to do
the monitoring and a hierarchy,
you're going to get 501 pages,
which is bad.
So,
what you really want to do is you want
the system to be smart enough to go,
"Well, if the router goes down,
all the servers are behind that,
so just tell me the router's down,
and I'm going to know that
something really bad is going on,
and I'm going to go check
out the router." And so,
you can do that with the Nagios.
Again, that's something that you can do
for free with Nagios that usually
you have to pay a lot of money for.
That's really what Ativoli
made their name on,
was the ability to do things like that.
And other tools like Unicenter as well.
And within the contact and
the notification system,
you can do a lot within that, too.
You can notify via email.
You can notify via pager.
You can notify via any way
that you want to set up,
any gadget that you have.
[Transcript missing]
So let's show you how that works.
So let's flip back to the demo system.
So, what we've got here is a movie that's
going to show you exactly how it works.
The demo system that we configured
and ran is back in Cupertino,
so it was easier rather
than cart all that here,
just to show you a quick movie
of how this would actually work.
But before I go into that,
I'm going to show you the command
script that we ran to do the monitoring,
and just show you how that lays out.
So what you're gonna see here,
so here's the original RAID script,
check script that I wrote,
and you can see here, again,
there's some core logic here that
goes out and checks the system.
And let's go into this script,
which is the Nagios monitoring script.
This is a little bit bigger,
but actually all this stuff is
just Nagios stuff that's the same
on every script that you run.
What you can see here is that we're
actually almost exactly the same.
This is the only stuff that we
added to enable the software
RAID check for Nagios.
So you can see this looks
almost exactly the same.
We changed a couple lines to
change how it reports back.
A Nagios thing here with exit status
saying that this is a critical problem.
The output here saying that we're gonna
log this to Nagios instead of sending
it to the pager like we did before.
And that's really all
the changes that we made.
And so we changed the script,
we set up the system
to be monitored by it,
and I'll go ahead and
show you how that looks.
Thank you.
So to start out with here,
we're at the Nagios main screen.
This is the main network
management console that you'd
see when you're running Nagios.
And you can see here on the left side,
there's various options that you have.
There's various reports and
screens that are pre-set up.
This all comes with it.
None of that needs to be set up.
It's automatically built.
And what you can see here is that we've
actually got an unhandled problem here.
And so, we'll click through to
the unhandled problem,
and what you see here is
that we've had an error.
This is not really pausing.
What you can see here is that
we've had an error when we were
checking the software RAID.
So the check software RAID failed.
We've got a critical problem.
You can see we've got the information
here that the Xlab XS04 server
has a disk with status failed.
And so we'll click through to that.
And you can see here's a lot more
information about this specific alert.
And Nagios also tracks a lot of
information about the specific
host that we have as well.
And so we're going to go ahead
and click through to that.
And we can see the state of the host,
and we can see how things are running.
And we'll go ahead and look at the
status of all the services that
are running on the host as well.
And so this is pretty cool, too.
What we can see here is everything
that Nagios is currently monitoring.
These are all the different agents
that are collecting data here.
You can see there's data
here about the software RAID.
There's also data about the load average,
so it's tracking statistics,
whether NFS is running,
whether there's any errors,
how much disk is in
use on the root volume.
Some of these are off the shelf.
Some of these are things
that we customize.
But there's a lot of data you can
see here that we're collecting.
And, again, this is a free network
management framework.
This doesn't cost you anything.
It's pretty easy to set up.
There's a really good Mac OS X how-to
guide that we listed on the WWDC site.
But if you just Google for
Nagios how-to Mac OS X,
you'll find it on the Internet.
It's on guysmac.com page.
And so, let's go on here and show you,
go back to the main status page.
And so you can see here we've
only got two systems in here,
but Nagios does build you a standard
status map that you can see here.
And we can very quickly go in if
we had a bunch of servers and see
the status of all the servers.
So there's a ton of data
that we collect in here,
a ton of good information.
And so to end up back on
the overview screen here,
as you can see,
Nagios is great because it
really does a good job of giving
you the pulse of your network,
lets you see everything that's running.
I love this tactical overview
screen because it gives you just
a quick view of how your system's
running and how things are going.
Again,
this is running actually on OS X Server,
and it's monitoring OS X Server.
You don't have to run
Nagios on OS X Server,
although it runs very well there.
And then from a client perspective,
you don't have to just
monitor OS X Server clients,
XSERVs.
You can monitor XSERV RAIDs.
You can monitor Windows machines.
You can monitor other Unixes.
You can monitor other devices.
It's actually very easy
to move things into it.
So let's flip back to the slides.
Other resources are on the WWDC site.
With the sample scripts
that we showed you today,
we didn't have time to get those
through the official submittal system,
but Jason Anthony Guy,
who owns this track,
guaranteed me that we'd get these up
on the developer side in some way,
shape, or form.
Because we're towards the end of WWDC,
we don't have a lot of related
sessions to tell you about,
but there's one that if
you're still here on Friday,
you really shouldn't miss,
and that's Steve Heyman's
Building Automator Actions for
System Administrator session.
Steve rocks.
He's a really entertaining presenter.
Don't ask him to list the digits of pi,
but Steve is just a great guy,
and it's a really interesting session.
I think you'll learn a lot
of great stuff in there.